#Ethics and the Central Park Jogger Case

##Sanjana Krishnan

###UNC Chapel Hill

+---------------+---------------+--------------------+
|     Name      |   Age         |    Prison Time     |
+===============+===============+====================+
| Yusef Salaam  | 28            | 6.5 years          |
|               |               |                    |
+---------------+---------------+--------------------+
| Kevin         | 28            | 6.5 years          |
| Richardson    |               |                    |
+---------------+---------------+--------------------+
| Raymond       | 28            | 8 years            |
| Santana       |               |                    |
+---------------+---------------+--------------------+
| Kharey Wise   | 30            | 11.5 years         |
|               |               |                    |
+---------------+---------------+--------------------+
| Anton McCray  | 28            | 6 years            |
|               |               |                    |
+---------------+---------------+--------------------+

**Introduction**

More than twenty-six years ago, on April 19, 1989, Trisha Meili was
raped while jogging through Central Park (&ldquo;Central Park,&rdquo; 2014). Five
young boys, each of either black or Hispanic descent, were tried and
convicted for this rape and sentenced to a range of five to fifteen
years in prison. The five juveniles were picked up by police because of
their close proximity to Central Park on the night of the attack and
were pressured into confessing to the crime. The five were convicted of
committing the rape despite the fact that their DNA did not match that
which was found at the scene of the crime. Finally, in 2002, a man named
Mathias Reyes confessed to raping Meili alone, and DNA testing backed up
his words. While he could not be prosecuted because the statute of
limitations for the incident had ended, the wrong convictions of the
five males were vacated. They proceeded to sue New York City for their
wrongful imprisonment. They were not able to reach a settlement under
Mayor Michael Bloomberg, but Mayor de Blasio supported the five, and the
city reached a settlement of forty-one million dollars in 2014. The men,
however, are still in search of fifty-two million more dollars from the
state of New York. It is possible to determine what the right actions to
take were in this case based on the theories of consequentialism and
deontology, and how scholars such as Weimer and Vining, Hirschman, and
Bok see these ideas. The racial tensions affiliated with this case as
well as the facts and liberties that were ignored allow for an analysis
using different ethical frameworks. Ultimately, there was an effort to
frame the five males for the rape of Trisha Meili because of racial
stereotypes working against them, and this resulted in the taking away
of their civil rights.

**Consequentialism vs. Deontology**

Consequentialism is the theory that an action is only right if it
maximizes the good consequences. This branches out into the idea of
utilitarianism, which is the tendency to promote good or prevent harm.
Peter Singer, a utilitarian absolutist, places equal consideration for
every person’s happiness and suffering (Singer, 1979, p. 3). According
to Singer, children and the elderly are valued less because it takes
more effort to keep these groups alive. He even goes so far as to equate
humans and animals. In this frame of thought, the same theory is used to
solve all problems. The foundation of utilitarianism is to figure out
what solution results in the greatest good for the greatest number of
people. In addition to Singer’s ideas, Jeremy Bentham looks at the good
consequences of utilitarianism as a measurement of pleasure (Cahn &
Markie, 1998, p. 322). An action is moral if it has a higher net utility
than any of the alternatives. John Stuart Mill, on the other hand,
replaces pleasure with happiness, which is a higher and more qualitative
measure of good consequences (Mill, 2008, p. 8). These differing ways of
exploring consequentialism permit an analysis of the happenings of the
central park jogger case.

In concurrence with the rape of Trisha Meili, there were groups of
teenagers gallivanting around Central Park and assaulting strangers
(&ldquo;Central Park,&rdquo; 2014). The five males that were brought in by police
were identified as participating in the attacks. In accordance with
utilitarianism, taking these boys off the streets and into prison would
bring the greatest good to the greatest number of people because
assumedly having less of those teenagers free would result in a safer
environment for the citizens of New York City. As utilitarianism does
not include morals or rights, the infringement on the defendants’
liberties and ignorance of the facts of the case by police, media, and
prosecutors would not necessarily matter in a utilitarian analysis of
the situation. The prosecutors also set out to close the case quickly in
order to quell the public and satisfy those who were horrified by the
rape. From the point of view of utilitarianism, the quick prosecution
and conviction of the five males, even while disregarding certain
evidence pointing to their innocence, serves to provide the community
with an answer to the tragedy and an end to the events. Consequentialism
and utilitarianism strive to maximize good consequences, and this was
achieved through the prosecutors’ actions. However, always looking out
for the greatest good can result in the ignorance of individuals’
rights.

On the other hand, deontology focuses on whether the action itself is
right or wrong, as opposed to whether the consequences are right or
wrong. Unlike consequentialism, deontology takes human rights and the
difference between rights-holders and duty-bearers into account
(Donnelly, 1989, p. 8). People are entitled to have rights, and they are
enforceable by law. Duty-bearers, or states, have the responsibility of
respecting the rights of rights-holders, or individuals. Moreover,
Immanuel Kant believes in following categorical imperatives no matter
what, stating that the right course of action is to tell the truth all
of the time (Kant, 1799, p. 2). Instead of consequentialism’s quest to
help the greatest number of people, deontology looks to measure the
morality of an act.

In the aftermath of Trisha Meili’s rape, the police ignored several
rights that the five males were entitled to as citizens (&ldquo;Central Park,&rdquo;
2014). It is against procedure to release the names of those under the
age of sixteen to the media before indictment, but the media printed the
five names. Furthermore, the boys were interrogated for hours without
parents present, and some were pressured into giving video confessions.
The officers also manipulated the minors into saying that the others
raped Meili. The confessions that were received from the minors were
entered into evidence even though the parents were not with them during
questioning. Moreover, the DNA evidence was found to have come from a
single person, and it did not match with any of the five. The officers
and prosecutors wanted to close the case quickly to quiet the public,
and it was possible to blame five young males of color because it was
easy for people to believe that they committed the crime no matter the
evidence. When it comes to deontology, it would seem that the
duty-bearers, or the officers, public, and media, did not succeed in
holding up the rights of the rights-holders, the five males because of
the obvious civil rights violations. If deontology were followed during
the duration of the case, it would mean that the rights of the males
would not have been violated. The events during the questioning and
trial also go against Kantian values, as the public officials did not
follow the categorical imperative of always telling the truth.

**Weimer and Vining**

According to Weimer and Vining, policy analysts must choose the correct
course of action based on their own personal values when it comes to
ethical dilemmas (Weimer & Vining, 1999, p. 46). Between having
responsibility to the client, analytical integrity, and conception of
the public good, analysts must decide which actions allow them to
achieve their goals. When analysts run into conflicts with their client,
they can take action to either remove themselves from the situation or
bring attention to the conflict. In contrast to this, responsibility to
the client may result in &ldquo;cooking&rdquo; the results, or putting out
information that better supports the client’s position. Human rights
violations can occur depending on the values of those involved.

The officers and lawyers who violated many of the males’ rights fit the
role of responsibility to the client the most. They worked to push the
trial forward and convict the five males, even resorting to
misrepresenting information gleaned from investigations, such as DNA
evidence (&ldquo;Central Park,&rdquo; 2014). Closing the case would also help the
prosecutors make their conviction records look better, which helps their
careers. The “client” in this instance would be the justice system,
which did not ultimately help the five receive justice. The right action
to take in this framework depends on the policy analyst’s values, so if
those involved with the case cared more about preserving civil rights or
focusing on the facts, different courses of action may have been taken.
In the end, Weimer and Vining assert that a combination of all three of
the values is the right action. In this situation, racial tensions and
responsibility to the client worked together to allow rights and many
facts of the case to be ignored.

**Hirschman**

Hirschman argues that even when institutions are strong, failures can
happen (Hirschman, 1970, p. 4). When faced with a conflict within an
organization, an individual can raise his or her voice, exit, show
loyalty to the organization, or any combination of the three. This,
however, does not always result in good consequences because of faulty
institutions.

The United States criminal justice system was created to make sure that
defendants are innocent until they are proven guilty. In this case,
however, it seems that the five juveniles were presumed to be guilty
from the beginning, based on how the officers interrogated and
manipulated them into confessing (&ldquo;Central Park,&rdquo; 2014). This goes along
with Hirschman’s theory that institutions do not hold up in every
situation. The officers circumvented several laws in order to receive
confessions, especially as the five males did not have their parents
present. In this situation, there was no system of checks and balances
to watch over the officers’ and prosecutors’ actions, and this resulted
in wrongful convictions for the five males. There was no way for the
five males to go against the will of the prosecutors, police officers,
and media that were against them by utilizing voice, exit, or loyalty.

**Bok**

In Bok’s writings, some level of truthfulness is necessary to society
(Bok, 1999, p. 19). She argues that people do not like to be told lies,
especially from the government. There needs to be a difference between
truth and deceit, and lying decreases trust in the government. According
to Bok’s principle of veracity, everyone is obligated to avoid lying and
look for truthful alternatives.

The aforementioned lies told by the officers, prosecution, and media
during the Meili case were used to deceive the public (&ldquo;Central Park,&rdquo;
2014). The crucifying of the five males resulted in an outcry against
them from the general public. In compliance with Bok’s theory, lies
should only be told as a last resort, and that was not the case in this
situation. This deception should then lead to people distrusting their
government. The prosecutors had racial tensions and stereotypes on their
side when they deceived the public to achieve their ends. The right
action according to Bok would be to tell the public the truth and to not
twist the facts to get the five males convicted.

**Conclusion**

Using different ethical frameworks, it is possible to ascertain what is
theoretically the right course of action in dealing with the rape of
Trisha Meili. However, real life situations are too complicated to
simply apply a single framework to figure out what is right. Those
involved with the case went against deontology and the ideas of
Hirschman and Bok. Weimer and Vining would argue that they placed the
most importance on responsibility to the client. Moreover, they twisted
the evidence to convict the males in order to please the greatest number
of people, which is a characteristic of utilitarianism. While the
prosecutors were trying to satisfy those in power, which is something
that occurs in many cases, it is also important for them to uphold the
rights of the defendants. Due to racial biases and stereotypes, the five
were wrongly convicted. In other situations, it may be necessary to use
deception to protect public safety and bring the greatest good to the
greatest number of people, but in this case, lying about the events that
happened only succeeded in placing the wrong people in prison.

References

Bok, S. (1999). *Lying: Moral Choice in Public and Private Life*, New
York: Random House.

Cahn, S. M., & Markie, P. (1998). *Ethics*, New York and Oxford: Oxford
University Press.

Central Park Jogger Case. (2014). *The New York Times*, Retrieved from
http://topics.nytimes.com/top/reference/timestopics/subjects/c/central\_park\_jogger\_case\_1989/index.html

Donnelly, J. (1989). *Universal Human Rights in Theory and Practice*.
Ithaca and London:

Cornell University Press.

Hirschman, A. O. (1970). *Exit, Voice, and Loyalty*, p. 4.

Kant. I. (1799). *On a supposed right to lie from altruistic motives*,
p. 2.

Mill, J. S. (2008). *Utilitarianism*, p. 8.

Singer, P. (1979). About Ethics. *Practical Ethics*, 3.

Weimer, D., & Vining, A. (1999). *Toward Professional Ethics*, Prentice
Hall.
